So hopefully the formula for
the unequal variance case
looks pretty familiar to you.
It's the difference in the means plus or
minus a t quantile times
the standard error.
The standard error is calculated
assuming there's a different variance in
each of the two groups.
It turns out that if the x observations
and the y observations are IID normal,
potentially with different means and
potentially with different variances,
the relevant normalized statistic
does not follow a t distribution.
Instead, it can be approximated
by a t distribution,
where we choose a rather elaborate
formula for the degrees of freedom.
Now no one remembers this degrees
of freedom calculation, and it's a,
it's a very odd calculation because it
just doesn't involve the sample sizes, but
actually the estimated standard deviations
and variances from the two groups.
Nonetheless, if you plug in this
potentially fractional degrees of freedom,
you get a t calculation that very closely
approximates the relevant distribution,
which is not actually a t distribution,
and
it turns out that it works well enough
that I can give the statement that
when you're in doubt just use
the unequal variance interval.
On this page, I simply show churning
through the calculations for
the oral contraceptive
example from earlier.
You might want to go through this
calculation just so you can at once
convince yourself that you can plug
into the standard deviation formula,
particularly, the degrees of freedom
that you get in this case is 15.04.
Nonetheless, typically when we
want unequal variance t tests,
we simply use the r command t.test
with var.equal equals FALSE,
and that'll do the relevant t
test with unequal variances and
produce the reletant, relevant t
quantile with unequal variances.
So let's summarize what
we talked about today.
We talked about creating intervals
using the t distribution,
some of the handiest intervals
in all of statistics.
When we have single observations or
paired observations for which we've taken
the difference, we use the t interval
to create intervals that are highly
robust to the underlying assumptions
regarding the distribution of the data.
However, we have talked about a couple of
cases where it's probably preferable to
use something other than the t
distribution and t intervals.
For example, we talked about
when the data are highly skewed,
you may either want to take a log,
or look for different procedures.
In addition, when your data is binary,
you might consider something like looking
at odds ratios, which we will cover
in our generalized linear model
component of the regression class.
The same can be said for count data,
where we'll talk about Poisson models and
generalized linear models for rates,
again in our regression class.
For several of the other
two-group special cases, the class
Mathematical Biostatistics Boot Camp 2,
also on Coursera, covers many of them.